Add Time-series to Grafana visualizations (#1147)
timescale/docs: timescaledb/tutorials/grafana/visualizations/time-series.md

# Build a time-series graph in Grafana 

> A time-series graph is a line graph consisting series of data points in order on
> cartesian coordinates. The X axis represents time and the Y axis represents the 
> value of the data point. They are useful for visualizing trends and fluctuations 
> in the data. The time-series graph is the most common type of graph in Grafana
> and is therefore the default panel type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A time-series graph is a line graph consisting of a series of data points in order on
cartesian coordinates, useful for visualizing trends and fluctuations 
in the data. The X-axis represents time and the Y-axis represents the 
value of the data point. The time-series graph is the most common type of graph in Grafana
and is therefore the default panel type.
```

> They answer questions like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Time-series graphs are useful for answering questions like:
```

* What is the hourly stock price of AMD today?
* How many users visited a website page each day in the past week?
* What was the temperature in yesterday?

## Data for Grafana time-series graphs 
To plot a time-series graph, Grafana requires you to provide a time column and 
the respective value column. To plot multiple time-series graphs in a single 
panel you need to provide multiple value columns.

This is an example of valid time-series data:
```bash

> Time                | Value 1 | Value 2 |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Time                | Value_1 | Value_2 |
```
Really minor, but we generally try to avoid spaces in column names per convention. I realize this is just an example, but consistency is good.

--------------------+---------+---------+
2022-02-08 07:30:01 |      10 |       1 |
2022-02-08 07:31:01 |      15 |       2 |
2022-02-08 07:32:01 |      20 |       3 |
2022-02-08 07:33:01 |      25 |       4 |
2022-02-08 07:34:01 |      30 |       5 |
```

This tutorial shows you how to:
* Create a time-series graph from raw data

> * Create a time-series graph from pre-aggregated data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Create a time-series graph from pre-aggregated data using Continuous Aggregates
```
Probably link to CAGGs above unless we do it elsewhere.

* `$symbol`: a variable used to filter results by stock symbols.
* `$bucket_interval`: the interval size to pass to the `time_bucket`
  function when aggregating data.
* `$__timeFrom()::timestamptz` & `$__timeTo()::timestamptz`:
  Grafana variables. You change the values of these variables by
  using the dashboard's date chooser when viewing your graph.

## Create a time-series graph with raw data

A very common use-case of the time-series graph is displaying stock data. It 
lends itself well to this use-case as no additional computation is required to 
visualize the data. A time-series graph makes it easy to see if the value of a
stock is going up or down. 

<procedure>

### Creating a time-series graph with raw data

1.  Add the `$symbol` variable of type `Text box` to the Grafana dashboard.

1.  In Grafana, create a new panel and add this query:

    ```SQL
    SELECT time,
        price
    FROM stocks_real_time
    WHERE symbol = '$symbol'
        AND time >= $__timeFrom()::timestamptz AND time < $__timeTo()::timestamptz
    ORDER BY time;
    ```

1.  Enter `AMD` in the `symbol` variable. Adjust the time range of your 

>     dashboard if desired. Keep in mind that we use a raw query, therefore large
>     time ranges can be computationally expensive.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    dashboard if desired. Keep in mind that queries raw transaction data, therefore long
    time ranges could return a significant number of rows and be computationally expensive for 
    Grafana to display.
```

1.  When 'Table view' is selected, the returned data looks like this:

    ```bash
    time                | price |
    --------------------+--------+
    2022-02-08 06:38:21 |  123  |
    2022-02-08 06:38:28 |  123  |
    2022-02-08 06:39:18 |  123  |
    2022-02-08 06:39:56 |  123  |
                …       |   …   |
    ```

    The key feature with any time-series data used by Grafana is that it must 
    have a column named `time` with timestamp data. The other columns used for 
    graphing data can have different names, but each time-series chart must have 

>     a `time` column in the results. For the Histogram visualization,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    a `time` column in the results. For the Time-series visualization,
```

    the timestamp values must be in ascending order or you receive an error.

> 1.  Select 'time series' as your visualization type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1.  Select 'Time series' as your visualization type.
```

    <img class="main-content__illustration" src="https://assets.timescale.com/docs/images/tutorials/visualizations/time-series/time-series-visualization-type.png" alt="Screenshot of the Grafana dashboard. The 'Visualizations' tab is focused. Underneath, 'Time-series' shows as a visualization type."/>

> 1.  Grafana returns this graph:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1.  Grafana returns a graph that looks similar to this:
```

    <img class="main-content__illustration" src="https://assets.timescale.com/docs/images/tutorials/visualizations/time-series/simple-time-series-graph.png" alt="Screenshot of the time-series graph produced by Grafana. The graph represents the price of AMD in the past 6 hours."/>

</procedure>

## Create a time-series graph from pre-aggregated data
In the previous example, we queried for all transactions of AMD stock in a 6 
hour period which resulted in ~3 800 data points. If you query for transactions 

> of AMD stock in a 3 month period, you get around 1,500,000 data points. It's not smart 
> to graph this amount of rows every 30 seconds, which is the refresh interval 
> default. This uses a lot of CPU, memory, and network bandwidth. In extreme cases
> Grafana will freeze and require a restart.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of AMD stock in a 3 month period, you'll typically get around 1,500,000 data points. Grafana, like
many charting tools, don't perform well when they attempt to plot millions of points on a graph. And,
by default, Grafana refreshes dashboards every 30 seconds which would further strain dashboard
rendering while using a lot of CPU, memory, and network bandwidth. In extreme cases
Grafana will freeze and require a restart.
```

[`time_bucket`][time_bucket] hyperfunction.

<procedure>

## Create a time-series graph from pre-aggregated data

1.  Add the `$bucket_interval` variable of type `Interval` to the Grafana dashboard

1.  In Grafana, create a new panel and add this query:

    ```sql
    SELECT time_bucket('$bucket_interval', time) AS time,
    	AVG(price) AS price
    FROM stocks_real_time
    WHERE symbol = '$symbol'
        AND time >= $__timeFrom()::timestamptz AND time < $__timeTo()::timestamptz
    GROUP BY time_bucket('$bucket_interval', time);
    ```   

1.  With a `bucket_interval` of 30 minutes and a date range of `Last 30 days`, Grafana
    returns this graph:

    <img class="main-content__illustration" src="https://assets.timescale.com/docs/images/tutorials/visualizations/time-series/time-bucket-graph.png" alt="Screenshot of the time-series graph produced by Grafana using the `time_bucket` hyperfunction. The graph represents the price of AMD stock in the past 30 days with an interval of 30 minutes."/>

    Because the stock market is only open from 9:30&nbsp;AM to 4:00&nbsp;PM on weekdays, 
    there are large gaps in our dataset where no data is present. Grafana 

>     automatically connects the last non null to the nearest other non null value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    automatically connects the last non null to the nearest other non-null value.
```

    In this case, the `time_bucket` hyperfunction doesn't return a row if there 
    is no data in the bucket. This stops you from using the `Connect null values`
    option in the options panel.

1.  In your query, replace `time_bucket` with `time_bucket_gapfill`.
   
    ```SQL
    SELECT time_bucket_gapfill('$bucket_interval', time) as time,
	    AVG(price) as price 
    FROM stocks_real_time
    WHERE symbol = '$symbol'
        AND time >= $__timeFrom()::timestamptz AND time < $__timeTo()::timestamptz
    GROUP BY time_bucket_gapfill('$bucket_interval', time);
    ```

>     You can use [`time_bucket_gapfill`][time-bucket-gapfill] to circumvent the 

Reviewer: I think this should be moved above the procedure. "but wait, there's a solution for this issue, and time_bucket_gapfill is the answer... blah, blah..."

    issue of `time_bucket` not returning rows when the bucket is empty. Usually,
    `time_bucket_gapfill` is used in combination with [`LOCF`][locf] 
    ("Last Observation Carried Forward") but if you omit this function, 
    `time_bucket_gapfill` returns a null value which you can use to connect 
    values based on a threshold in Grafana.

1.  Set `Connect null values` in the options panel to `Threshold` with a value
    of `24h`.

    <img class="main-content__illustration" src="https://assets.timescale.com/docs/images/tutorials/visualizations/time-series/connect-null-values.png" alt="Screenshot of the 'Connect null values' in the time-series options panel. The selected value is 'Threshold' and it has a value of less than 24 hours."/>

    . Grafana returns this graph:

>     <img class="main-content__illustration" src="https://assets.timescale.com/docs/images/tutorials/visualizations/time-series/time-bucket-gapfill-graph.png" alt="Screenshot of the time-series graph produced by Grafana using the `time_bucket_gapfill` hyperfunction. The graph represents the price of AMD stock in the past 30 days with an interval of 30 minutes and null values for every gap larger than 24 hours"/>

Reviewer: This doesn't seem to be displaying in the preview.

Reviewer: oh, actualy, it's the ALT text that's showing in the middle for some reason??

Author: I think I forgot to upload this image.

    This graph allows you to better visualize the stock price during the week where
    it bridges the gap between 4:00&nbsp;PM and 9:30&nbsp;AM, but doesn't connect the values in
    the 48+ hour period during the weekend where there is no data present in the
    dataset.

</procedure>

[install-timescale]: /install/:currentVersion:/
[gsg-data]: /timescaledb/:currentVersion:/getting-started/
[time_bucket]: https://docs.timescale.com/api/latest/hyperfunctions/time_bucket/
[time-bucket-gapfill]: https://docs.timescale.com/api/latest/hyperfunctions/gapfilling-interpolation/time_bucket_gapfill/
[locf]: https://docs.timescale.com/api/latest/hyperfunctions/gapfilling-interpolation/locf/

> q

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

# Build a time-series graph in Grafana 
A time-series graph is a line graph that plots points changing over time. It

> allows you to see trends and fluctuations in your data. It's usually plotted in
> 2 dimensions. The X axis represents time, and the Y axis represents the
> value of your data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
allows you to see trends and fluctuations in your data. It's usually plotted in
two dimensions. The X-axis represents time, and the Y-axis represents the
value of your data.
```

See below for my comments on "2" vs. "two". 

For the axis, I honestly don't know the official rule. But in nearly everything I read/see, folks use the hyphen. @charislam - any input here?

Reviewer 2: Did some style guide spelunking. Chicago Manual of Style, which is our backup style guide, recommends _x_-axis and _y_-axis (note the lowercase). They are happy to go either way with the hyphen as long as it's consistent. I think it looks most conventional in lowercase with the hyphen, so I would recommend that.

    2022-02-08 06:38:21 |  123  |
    2022-02-08 06:38:28 |  123  |
    2022-02-08 06:39:18 |  123  |
    2022-02-08 06:39:56 |  123  |
                …       |   …   |
    ```

    Check that your data meets Grafana's requirements for graphing time series.
    The data must have a column named `time`, containing timestamps. Other
    columns can be named as you like. For the time-series visualization, the
    timestamps must be in ascending order. Otherwise, you get an error.

1.  Select `Time series` as your visualization type.

    <img class="main-content__illustration" src="https://assets.timescale.com/docs/images/tutorials/visualizations/time-series/time-series-visualization-type.png" alt="Screenshot of the Grafana dashboard. The 'Visualizations' tab is focused. Underneath, 'Time-series' shows as a visualization type."/>

1.  Grafana returns a graph that looks similar to this:

    <img class="main-content__illustration" src="https://assets.timescale.com/docs/images/tutorials/visualizations/time-series/simple-time-series-graph.png" alt="Screenshot of the time-series graph produced by Grafana. The graph represents the price of AMD in the past 6 hours."/>

</procedure>

> ## Create a time-series graph from pre-aggregated data using Continuous Aggregates

Reviewer: Ah, now I understand why I was confused about in my thinking during our recent conversations.

You aren't showing continuous aggregates at all here. This is just an aggregate query using Time_bucket().

So, change heading here in kind.

In the previous example, you queried for all transactions of AMD stock in a 6 -hour period.
This returned approximately 3 800 data points. If you query for all transactions 
of AMD stock in a 3-month period, you get approximately 1,500,000 data 
points.

Grafana, like many charting tools, doesn't perform well when plotting millions of points.
Also, by default, Grafana refreshes dashboards every 30 seconds. This further strains
CPU, memory, and network bandwidth. In extreme cases, Grafana freezes.

To solve this problem, you can pre-aggregate your data using TimescaleDB's 
[`time_bucket`][time_bucket] hyperfunction.

<procedure>

> ## Create a time-series graph from pre-aggregated data using continuous aggregates

Reviewer: Same here.

    ORDER BY time;
    ```

1.  In the options panel, set `Connect null values` to `Threshold`. Give `Threshold` a value
    of `24h`.

    <img class="main-content__illustration" src="https://assets.timescale.com/docs/images/tutorials/visualizations/time-series/connect-null-values.png" alt="Screenshot of the 'Connect null values' in the time-series options panel. The selected value is 'Threshold' and it has a value of less than 24 hours."/>

1.  Grafana returns a graph similar to this one:

    <img class="main-content__illustration" src="https://assets.timescale.com/docs/images/tutorials/visualizations/time-series/time-bucket-gapfill-graph.png" alt="Screenshot of the time-series graph produced by Grafana using the `time_bucket_gapfill` hyperfunction. The graph represents the price of AMD stock in the past 30 days with an interval of 30 minutes and null values for every gap larger than 24 hours"/>

    This graph allows you to better visualize the stock price during the week.
    It bridges the less-than-24-hour gap between 4:00&nbsp;PM and 9:30&nbsp;AM,
    but doesn't connect the values over the weekend.

</procedure>

## Create multiple time-series graphs in a single panel

> If you want to compare the price of 2 stocks over time, you can make 
> 2 separate panels with 2 separate symbol variables. A better alternative is to 
> combine the 2 time-series graphs into a single panel. To do this, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to compare the price of two stocks over time, you could make 
two separate panels with separate symbol variables, however, a better alternative is to 
combine the two time-series graphs into a single panel. To do this, 
```
I'm a big fan of using numeric values when it makes sense, but using "two" here is proper. When we refer to things like "one hour" in a `time_bucket` function, I instead push for "1 hour" (or "1-hour") because that's what the literal parameter value is.

Here though, <=10 usually means we write it out.

# Build a time-series graph in Grafana 
A time-series graph is a line graph consisting of a series of data points in 
order on cartesian coordinates, useful for visualizing trends and fluctuations 
in the data. The X axis represents time and the Y axis represents the value of 
the data point. They are  The time-series graph is the most common type of graph
in Grafana and is therefore the default panel type.

> Time series graphs are useful for answering questions like:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With a time-series graph, you can answer questions like:
```

* `$symbol`: a variable used to filter results by stock symbols.
* `$bucket_interval`: the interval size to pass to the `time_bucket`
  function when aggregating data.
* `$__timeFrom()::timestamptz` & `$__timeTo()::timestamptz`:
  Grafana variables. You change the values of these variables by
  using the dashboard's date chooser when viewing your graph.

## Create a time-series graph with raw data

A very common use-case of the time-series graph is displaying stock data. It 
lends itself well to this use-case as no additional computation is required to 
visualize the data. A time-series graph makes it easy to see if the value of a
stock is going up or down. 

<procedure>

### Creating a time-series graph with raw data

1.  Add the `$symbol` variable of type `Text box` to the Grafana dashboard.

1.  In Grafana, create a new panel and add this query:

    ```SQL
    SELECT time,
        price
    FROM stocks_real_time
    WHERE symbol = '$symbol'
        AND time >= $__timeFrom()::timestamptz AND time < $__timeTo()::timestamptz
    ORDER BY time;
    ```

1.  Enter `AMD` in the `symbol` variable. Adjust the time range of your 

>     dashboard if desired. Keep in mind that we use a raw query, therefore long
>     time ranges could return a significant number of rows and be computationally
>     expensive for Grafana to display.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    dashboard if desired. This plot uses a raw query, so if you set a large
    time range, it might take a long time for Grafana to get all the rows and
    display the data.
```

1.  When 'Table view' is selected, the returned data looks like this:

    ```bash
    time                | price |
    --------------------+--------+
    2022-02-08 06:38:21 |  123  |
    2022-02-08 06:38:28 |  123  |
    2022-02-08 06:39:18 |  123  |
    2022-02-08 06:39:56 |  123  |
                …       |   …   |
    ```

>     The key feature with any time-series data used by Grafana is that it must 
>     have a column named `time` with timestamp data. The other columns used for 
>     graphing data can have different names, but each time-series chart must have 
>     a `time` column in the results. For the time-series visualization,
>     the timestamp values must be in ascending order or you receive an error.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Check that your data meets Grafana's requirements for graphing time series.
    The data must have a column named `time`, containing timestamps. Other
    columns can be named as you like. For the time-series visualization, the
    timestamps must be in ascending order. Otherwise, you get an error.
```

1.  Grafana returns a graph that looks similar to this:

    <img class="main-content__illustration" src="https://assets.timescale.com/docs/images/tutorials/visualizations/time-series/simple-time-series-graph.png" alt="Screenshot of the time-series graph produced by Grafana. The graph represents the price of AMD in the past 6 hours."/>

</procedure>

## Create a time-series graph from pre-aggregated data using Continuous Aggregates
In the previous example, we queried for all transactions of AMD stock in a 6 
hour period which resulted in ~3 800 data points. If you query for transactions 
of AMD stock in a 3 month period, you'll typically get around 1,500,000 data 
points. Grafana, like many charting tools, don't perform well when they attempt 
to plot millions of points on a graph. And, by default, Grafana refreshes 
dashboards every 30 seconds which would further strain dashboard rendering while
using a lot of CPU, memory, and network bandwidth. In extreme cases Grafana will
freeze and require a restart.

> To solve this problem you can pre-aggregate your data using TimescaleDB's 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To solve this problem, you can pre-aggregate your data using TimescaleDB's 
```

[`time_bucket`][time_bucket] hyperfunction.

<procedure>

> ## Create a time-series graph from pre-aggregated data using Continuous Aggregates

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Create a time-series graph from pre-aggregated data using continuous aggregates
```

> 1.  Add the `$bucket_interval` variable of type `Interval` to the Grafana dashboard

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1.  Add the `$bucket_interval` variable of type `Interval` to the Grafana dashboard.
```

    	AVG(price) AS price
    FROM stocks_real_time
    WHERE symbol = '$symbol'
        AND time >= $__timeFrom()::timestamptz AND time < $__timeTo()::timestamptz
    GROUP BY time_bucket('$bucket_interval', time)
    ORDER BY time;
    ```   

1.  With a `bucket_interval` of 30 minutes and a date range of `Last 30 days`, 
    Grafana returns this graph:

    <img class="main-content__illustration" src="https://assets.timescale.com/docs/images/tutorials/visualizations/time-series/time-bucket-graph.png" alt="Screenshot of the time-series graph produced by Grafana using the `time_bucket` hyperfunction. The graph represents the price of AMD stock in the past 30 days with an interval of 30 minutes."/>

    Because the stock market is only open from 9:30&nbsp;AM to 4:00&nbsp;PM on 
    weekdays, there are large gaps in our dataset where no data is present. 
    Grafana automatically connects the last non null to the nearest other 
    non-null value. In this case, the `time_bucket` hyperfunction doesn't return
    a row if there is no data in the bucket. This stops you from using the 
    `Connect null values` option in the options panel.
    

> 1.  To circumvent this issue, you can use [`time_bucket_gapfill`](https://docs.timescale.com/api/latest/hyperfunctions/gapfilling-interpolation/time_bucket_gapfill/).
>     Usually, this hyperfunction is used in combination with [`LOCF`](https://docs.timescale.com/api/latest/hyperfunctions/gapfilling-interpolation/locf/) 
>     ("Last Observation Carried Forward") but if you omit this function, 
>     `time_bucket_gapfill` returns a null value which you can use to connect 
>     values based on a threshold in Grafana.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1.  To circumvent this issue, you can use Grafana's `Connect null values` settings. But first,
    you need rows containing null values wherever you have no data. By default,
    `time_bucket` doesn't return a row if there is no data. In your query, replace `time_bucket`
    with [`time_bucket_gapfill`](https://docs.timescale.com/api/latest/hyperfunctions/gapfilling-interpolation/time_bucket_gapfill/).
    If you don't specify a gapfilling function, `time_bucket_gapfill` returns a row with a
    null value wherever there is no data.
```

1.  In your query, replace `time_bucket` with `time_bucket_gapfill`.
   
    ```SQL
    SELECT time_bucket_gapfill('$bucket_interval', time) as time,
	    AVG(price) as price 
    FROM stocks_real_time
    WHERE symbol = '$symbol'
        AND time >= $__timeFrom()::timestamptz AND time < $__timeTo()::timestamptz
    GROUP BY time_bucket_gapfill('$bucket_interval', time)
    ORDER BY time;
    ```

> 1.  Set `Connect null values` in the options panel to `Threshold` with a value
>     of `24h`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1.  In the options panel, set `Connect null values` to `Threshold`. Give `Threshold` a value
    of `24h`.
```

    <img class="main-content__illustration" src="https://assets.timescale.com/docs/images/tutorials/visualizations/time-series/connect-null-values.png" alt="Screenshot of the 'Connect null values' in the time-series options panel. The selected value is 'Threshold' and it has a value of less than 24 hours."/>

1.  Grafana returns a graph similar to this one:

    <img class="main-content__illustration" src="https://assets.timescale.com/docs/images/tutorials/visualizations/time-series/time-bucket-gapfill-graph.png" alt="Screenshot of the time-series graph produced by Grafana using the `time_bucket_gapfill` hyperfunction. The graph represents the price of AMD stock in the past 30 days with an interval of 30 minutes and null values for every gap larger than 24 hours"/>

>     This graph allows you to better visualize the stock price during the week 
>     where it bridges the gap between 4:00&nbsp;PM and 9:30&nbsp;AM, but doesn't 
>     connect the values in the 48+ hour period during the weekend where there is 
>     no data present in the dataset.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    This graph allows you to better visualize the stock price during the week.
    It bridges the less-than-24-hour gap between 4:00&nbsp;PM and 9:30&nbsp;AM,
    but doesn't connect the values over the weekend.
```

</procedure>

## Create multiple time-series graphs in a single panel

> In case you want to compare the price of 2 stocks to each other, you could make 
> 2 separate panels with 2 separate symbol variables. A better alternative is to 
> combine the two time-series graphs into a single panel. This is easily done by 
> changing our `$symbol` variable to a multi-value answer and making a slight 
> change to our query. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you want to compare the price of 2 stocks over time, you can make 
2 separate panels with 2 separate symbol variables. A better alternative is to 
combine the 2 time-series graphs into a single panel. To do this, 
change the `$symbol` variable to a multi-value answer and make a slight 
change to your query. 
```

1.  Add the query to the query options and select `Multi-Value` in the selection 
    options

    ```SQL
    SELECT DISTINCT(symbol) FROM company ORDER BY symbol ASC;
    ```

1.  Under 'Preview of values' you see a handful of company symbols ordered 
    alphabetically.

    <img class="main-content__illustration" src="https://assets.timescale.com/docs/images/tutorials/visualizations/time-series/preview-values.png" alt="A screenshot of the 'Preview of values' in the 'symbol' variable settings. A handful of company symbols are displayed."/>`

1.  In the dashboard panel, change the query to allow for multi-value answers:

    ```SQL
    SELECT time_bucket_gapfill('$bucket_interval', time) as time,
        AVG(price) as price,
        symbol
    FROM stocks_real_time
    WHERE symbol in ($symbol)
        AND time >= $__timeFrom()::timestamptz AND time < $__timeTo()::timestamptz
    GROUP BY time_bucket_gapfill('$bucket_interval', time), symbol
    ORDER BY time;
    ```

1.  Select multiple stocks from the symbol variables

>     <img class="main-content__illustration" src="https://assets.timescale.com/docs/images/tutorials/visualizations/time-series/select-stock.png" alt="A screenshot of the symbol variable selector. The symbols 'AAPL' and 'AMD' are ticked."/>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    <img class="main-content__illustration" src="https://assets.timescale.com/docs/images/tutorials/visualizations/time-series/select-stock.png" alt="A screenshot of the symbol variable selector. The symbols 'AAPL' and 'AMD' are selected."/>
```

# Build a time-series graph in Grafana 
A time-series graph is a line graph consisting series of data points in order on
cartesian coordinates. They are useful for visualizing trends and fluctuations 
in the data. The time-series graph is the most common type of graph in Grafana
and is therefore the default panel type.

They answer questions like:

* What is the hourly stock price of AMD today?
* How many users visited a website page each day in the past week?
* What was the temperature in yesterday?

## Data for Grafana time-series graphs 
To plot a time-series graph, Grafana requires you to provide a time column and 
the respective value column. To plot multiple time-series graphs at once you 
need to provide multiple value columns.

> Below you find an example of valid time-series data:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This is an example of valid time-series data:
```

```bash
       Time         | Value 1 | Value 2 |
--------------------+---------+---------+
2022-02-08 07:30:01 |      10 |       1 |
2022-02-08 07:31:01 |      15 |       2 |
2022-02-08 07:32:01 |      20 |       3 |
2022-02-08 07:33:01 |      25 |       4 |
2022-02-08 07:34:01 |      30 |       5 |
```

> ## What you'll learn

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

* Installed [TimescaleDB][install-timescale]
* Imported the stock trade data from the [Getting Started Tutorial][gsg-data]

<highlight type="note">
    If you are new to Grafana, see the

>     [Grafana tutorials](https://docs.timescale.com/getting-started/latest)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    [Grafana tutorials](https://docs.timescale.com/timescaledb/latest/tutorials/grafana/)
```

??

1.  Add the `$symbol` variable of type `Text box` to the Grafana dashboard.

1.  In Grafana, create a new panel and add this query:

    ```SQL
    SELECT time,
        price
    FROM stocks_real_time
    WHERE symbol = '$symbol'
        AND time >= $__timeFrom()::timestamptz AND time < $__timeTo()::timestamptz
    ORDER BY time;
    ```

1.  Enter `AMD` in the `symbol` variable. Adjust the time range of your 
    dashboard if desired. Keep in mind that we use a raw query, therefore large
    time ranges can be computationally expensive.

1.  When 'Table view' is selected, the returned data looks like this:

    ```bash
    time                | price |
    --------------------+--------+
    2022-02-08 06:38:21 |  123  |
    2022-02-08 06:38:28 |  123  |
    2022-02-08 06:39:18 |  123  |
    2022-02-08 06:39:56 |  123  |
                …       |   …   |
    ```

    The key feature with any time-series data used by Grafana is that it must 
    have a column named `time` with timestamp data. The other columns used for 
    graphing data can have different names, but each time-series chart must have 
    a `time` column in the results. For the Histogram visualization,

>     the timestamp values must be in ascending order or you will receive an error.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    the timestamp values must be in ascending order or you receive an error.
```

1.  Select 'time series' as your visualization type.

    <img class="main-content__illustration" src="https://assets.timescale.com/docs/images/tutorials/visualizations/time-series/time-series-visualization-type.png" alt="Screenshot of the Grafana dashboard. The 'Visualizations' tab is focused. Underneath, 'Time-series' shows as a visualization type."/>

1.  Grafana returns this graph:

    <img class="main-content__illustration" src="https://assets.timescale.com/docs/images/tutorials/visualizations/time-series/simple-time-series-graph.png" alt="Screenshot of the time-series graph produced by Grafana. The graph represents the price of AMD in the past 6 hours."/>

</procedure>

## Create a time-series graph from pre-aggregated data
In the previous example, we queried for all transactions of AMD stock in a 6 

> hour period which resulted in ~3 800 data points. If we query for transactions 
> of AMD stock in a 3 month period, we get ~1 500 000 data points. It's not smart 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
hour period which resulted in ~3 800 data points. If you query for transactions 
of AMD stock in a 3 month period, you get around 1,500,000 data points. It's not smart 
```

to graph this amount of rows every 30 seconds, which is the refresh interval 
default. This uses a lot of CPU, memory, and network bandwidth. In extreme cases
Grafana will freeze and require a restart.

> To solve this problem we pre-aggregate our data using TimescaleDB's 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To solve this problem you can pre-aggregate your data using TimescaleDB's 
```

[`time_bucket`][time_bucket] hyperfunction.

<procedure>

## Create a time-series graph from pre-aggregated data

1.  Add the `$bucket_interval` variable of type `Interval` to the Grafana dashboard

1.  In Grafana, create a new panel and add this query:

    ```sql
    SELECT time_bucket('$bucket_interval', time) AS time,
    	AVG(price) AS price
    FROM stocks_real_time
    WHERE symbol = '$symbol'
        AND time >= $__timeFrom()::timestamptz AND time < $__timeTo()::timestamptz
    GROUP BY time_bucket('$bucket_interval', time);
    ```   

1.  With a `bucket_interval` of 30 minutes and a date range of `Last 30 days`, Grafana
    returns this graph:

    <img class="main-content__illustration" src="https://assets.timescale.com/docs/images/tutorials/visualizations/time-series/time-bucket-graph.png" alt="Screenshot of the time-series graph produced by Grafana using the `time_bucket` hyperfunction. The graph represents the price of AMD stock in the past 30 days with an interval of 30 minutes."/>

>     Because the stock market is only open from 9:30am to 4:00pm on weekdays, 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    Because the stock market is only open from 9:30&nbsp;AM to 4:00&nbsp;PM on weekdays, 
```

    there are large gaps in our dataset where no data is present. Grafana 
    automatically connects the last non null to the nearest other non null value.

>     In our case, the `time_bucket` hyperfunction doesn't return a row if there 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    In this case, the `time_bucket` hyperfunction doesn't return a row if there 
```

>     is no data in the bucket. This stops us from using the `Connect null values`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    is no data in the bucket. This stops you from using the `Connect null values`
```

    option in the options panel.

1.  In your query, replace `time_bucket` with `time_bucket_gapfill`.
   
    ```SQL
    SELECT time_bucket_gapfill('$bucket_interval', time) as time,
	    AVG(price) as price 
    FROM stocks_real_time
    WHERE symbol = '$symbol'
        AND time >= $__timeFrom()::timestamptz AND time < $__timeTo()::timestamptz
    GROUP BY time_bucket_gapfill('$bucket_interval', time);
    ```

    We can use [`time_bucket_gapfill`][time-bucket-gapfill] to circumvent the 
    issue of `time_bucket` not returning rows when the bucket is empty. Usually,
    `time_bucket_gapfill` is used in combination with [`LOCF`][locf] 

>     ("Last Observation Carried Forward") but if we omit this function, 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    ("Last Observation Carried Forward") but if you omit this function, 
```

>     `time_bucket_gapfill` returns a null value which we can use to connect 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    `time_bucket_gapfill` returns a null value which you can use to connect 
```

    values based on a threshold in Grafana.

1.  Set `Connect null values` in the options panel to `Threshold` with a value

>     of <24h.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    of less than 24 hours.
```

>     <img class="main-content__illustration" src="https://assets.timescale.com/docs/images/tutorials/visualizations/time-series/connect-null-values.png" alt="Screenshot of the 'Connect null values' in the time-series options panel. The selected value is 'Threshold' and it has a value of <24h."/>

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    <img class="main-content__illustration" src="https://assets.timescale.com/docs/images/tutorials/visualizations/time-series/connect-null-values.png" alt="Screenshot of the 'Connect null values' in the time-series options panel. The selected value is 'Threshold' and it has a value of less than 24 hours."/>
```

1. Grafana returns this graph:

    <img class="main-content__illustration" src="https://assets.timescale.com/docs/images/tutorials/visualizations/time-series/time-bucket-gapfill-graph.png" alt="Screenshot of the time-series graph produced by Grafana using the `time_bucket_gapfill` hyperfunction. The graph represents the price of AMD stock in the past 30 days with an interval of 30 minutes and null values for every gap larger than 24 hours"/>

    This graph allows us to better visualize the stock price during the week where

>     it bridges the gap between 4pm and 9:30am, but doesn't connect the values in

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    it bridges the gap between 4&nbsp;PM and 9:30&nbsp;AM, but doesn't connect the values in
```

>     the 48+ hour period during the weekend where there is no data present in our

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    the 48 hour period during the weekend where there is no data present in our
```
